.TH FLACENSTEIN 1 "5 January 2006"
.SH NAME
flacenstein \- creates, organizes, and transcodes FLAC audio files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B flacenstein
.RI [\-rip]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B flacenstein
is a GUI program to rip, organize, and transcode FLAC files that represent
entire albums.  Flacenstein's FLAC files contain embedded cuesheets that divide
the album into tracks, a VORBIS comment block that identifies them, and an
APPLICATION block that contains a cover art image.  These are standard FLAC
files, but Flacenstein will not create, nor gracefully handle, other standard
FLAC files that do not follow these conventions.
.br
The author finds this to be a convenient format for digitising music CDs,
because it losslessly represents all of the information that can readily
be extracted from the disc in a single file.  The two main functions of
.B flacenstein
are to create these files with minimal effort, and transcode them to
the various (lossy) formats that are needed by portable players such as
the iPod.
.SS Ripping
.B flacenstein
contains a ripper based on cdparanoia, which means that it can be slow, but
but it extracts the highest quality copies that are possible, even from
damaged discs.  It uses the musicbrainz and CDDB databases to automatically
identify and tag most discs.   The cover art is automatically retrieved from Amazon 
if it is available.
.br
The ripper needs a "work path" (typically /tmp) which has enough space to
contain the raw CDDA, which can be 700 to 800 MB.  The "final output path"
is, obviously, where the finished FLAC files will end up.
.SS Transcoding
.B flacenstein
uses plugins to define the various transformations that can be applied to
the music library.  The three provided by the author are MP3 (requires
.B lame
), MPEG4/AAC (requires
.B faac
), and Ogg Vorbis (requires
.B oggenc
).  Each of these transformations produces one file per track, instead
of one file per album as the FLACs are stored.  If flacenstein can't find
the helper programs required by a plugin, that plugin will be disabled, but
other features can still be used.
.br
In the main flacenstein GUI window, the selection status of each FLAC can be
toggled by right clicking with the mouse.  Then select "Configure" on the
Transform menu, and set the output path.  You can then start the transcoding
process from the Transcode menu.  This can take quite a long time.  To save
time, the output plugins will skip re-encoding any files that already exist
in the output directory.
.br
.B flacenstein
can run an arbitrary number of encoding threads in parallel, if you have
a SMP machine or OpenMOSIX.  This is configured in the file flaccfg.py,
distributed as part of flacenstein.  With 12 threads running on an OpenMOSIX
cluster, the author is able to transcode as many as 300 albums per hour.
.SS "Other features"
Choose "Export list" from the Library menu to create a text file listing
all of your FLAC albums.  It is also possible to save and restore 
selection sets, which can be useful if you want to exclude certain
albums from your regular iPod update, for example.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-rip
Go directly to the ripper, bypassing the main GUI window.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR flac (1),
.BR metaflac (1),
.BR flac-image (1),
.BR cdparanoia (1)
.SH AUTHOR
flac-image was written by Michael A. Dickerson <mikey@singingtree.com>.  His web 
page, which might or might not have more information about this program, is at
http://obstrepero.us.
